Hey Christopher, welcome to Talk By The Mii.
Ah, it's been a little over a year, I just looked it up. It's nice to be back.
Yes, the annual appearance. I love it.
Sure, you want to make it annual? I can go for three or four and that's the end of the future.
Why not? We both spend a decent amount of time
behind microphones these days, don't we?
I seem to, yes. Yes, it does seem to be the way it is.
It's a funny world, right?
Yeah, well I was just looking it up because I figured
your standard interview question, "So what have you been doing?" It's like, well,
I've put out over a dozen courses since the last time I was on. So yes, as you said,
it's a lot of time behind the mic. Not so much the live mic.
So if I'm doing a little nervous, say the word "so" too many times.
It makes me more human than in my courses, I guess.
That's right. The magic of editing.
That was a concise and quick response.
It's great to have you back on the show and looking forward to
talking about one of my very, very favorite topics,
HTMX, this time in the context of Django.
Yeah, I was actually just the other day listening to your episode
428 when you had Vincent and Gibson on
and you delved into HTMX a little bit. They seem to be big fans.
It's, well,
one of the sort of semi-gags in the course that we're going to
talk about a little bit is I just kept telling people that I'm in love.
It really is the answer. I'd love to see it become part of the HTML
standard. It's a much happier way
of coding. Makes me feel like the old days.
Things are much simpler with it.
Yeah, I totally agree. Carson Gross, the creator of it, does often say
HTML just kind of stopped growing when JavaScript came along
and this is what it should have been.
Well, if I've got to do it, I'll take one for the team and build HTMX for everyone.
You're right. It really should just be built in more or less, shouldn't it?
Yeah, every once in a while you come across something where you sort of look at it and you're like, "Wait, this is the right way."
"Crap, I've been doing it wrong for almost 30 years. This is the right way."
Why didn't anyone tell me?
It's a little bit of a, "Oh, wait,
if I'd had this so long ago, it would have made this and this and this so much easier."
It's definitely some forward progress.
It is. Well, you mentioned
when I had the Django chat guys on the show not too long ago,
that was when we talked about Django.
Surprise, surprise. But mostly, we started out
with the focus of Django turning 18.
Maybe we can just start with Django itself before we dive into HTMX
because I think Django, more than the other
frameworks, has its opinions and its styles and its way of doing things.
Integrating with HTMX, I think, is
a pretty interesting thing that other people
and you've done as we'll talk about through this course that we're going to mention in a moment.
What are your thoughts on Django over the years and Django
being old enough to vote now?
There's this line I came across that I've since stolen.
Somebody said, "It's not a dinosaur, it's a shark."
I love that concept. It's still
evolving and it's still changing. It's still very actively developed.
I've been playing with Django 5 recently and there's nothing in there
that broke any of my 4 code. If you're going to be
coding with the same library over and over again, that's actually desirable.
You want the new features, but you don't want to have to go and redo something every single time.
I don't want to knock view. It's got some strengths
and we'll talk a little bit about that as well when we start getting into some of the HTMX
stuff. By example, because I don't use it very frequently, it seems every time
I go back it's like, "Oh, they've changed how this happens and I have to rethink this."
I don't run into that with Django.
It's become so large that it also
addresses different problems for different people. I love that they're adding all this asynchronous
stuff. I will probably never use it. I think it's great that it's out there
because it solves a problem for those
folks who are trying to use that kind of thing and they don't have to go off to another library.
But for those of us who don't use it, it's like, "Yep, that's fine. Whatever. It doesn't
break anything. They don't have to start from scratch." They keep chugging
along. Both Will and Carlton
commented about the community and they're right. It's there.
Django,
the project site that has all of the add-ons, there's over
4,000 different apps and libraries that you can use. So it's not
just the framework. It's not just the core. It's the ecosystem and it
makes a big difference. It makes your life a lot easier that way. A lot of choice.
More than almost any other individual library in Python,
Django's got a massive community behind it.
There aren't other conferences, right? There's PyCon and there's
DjangoCon and everything else is go to a PyCon
and talk about it in a room and then there's an entire conference for it. And two of them,
right? There's Europe and the US, right? So it's a big deal.
It is and it's been a while since I've been to a requests con.
Although I do like requests, yeah.
Also you mentioned the async stuff and some of these new things.
Python and Django, it's just amazing how stable they are in the sense
of two to three aside.
It's very, very, very rare. Not never, but
very rare that you have to go and fix code because a new version of Python came out.
Yeah, it's the same thing, right? So 3.12 just launched. I've been playing with the
RCs for a little bit. Just swap out the virtualenv
and my code just keeps chucking along, right?
I haven't run into a problem even with beta versions in years.
And that stability, it's important, right?
Like you kind of said, we're still hurting a little bit
from the scars from two to three. So I think everybody's being cautious
in the right way. Yeah, I think that's probably true.
Also, some of those new features that maybe you won't
use or I won't use or whatever, I think they're still really important to have
because I don't really hear it so much anymore actually, but
there used to be a lot of talk of like, "Oh, we're switching to Go because of async.
We need async, so we're switching to Go because we need..."
Even if you individually don't use it,
having those features in Django or
in Python, they're really important because they kind of
knock that conversation out, right? They're like, "Oh, we had all these people who love Python
but they had this one special case so they were forced to leave." Well, now they're not
necessarily forced to leave because of that. And I think that's positive for everyone
even if many people don't use it directly.
Yeah, well, for sure. If async is what was stopping you
from using Django and switching to FastAPI, then
now you don't necessarily have to. And again, I'm a fan of FastAPI.
A lot of it comes down to what you're building.
I often get the question, "Why would I pick Django versus this
versus that?" And I'm like, "Well, if you're building an actual project
where you need web pages as well as the API
as well as this and as well as that, well, you can do that with FastAPI plus SQLAlchemy
plus something else. But it's all self-contained in Django
and so things tend to work better. So those edge cases that you
talk about that might cause you to go off to another library, even if they don't
do it quite as well, just having it enough so that you don't leave
makes the difference for sure.
There's a whole show comparing Django to FastAPI right there, isn't there?
Probably, yes. In Django or Django Ninja. Probably several, yes.
Probably, but not this show, not this one.
Alright, what's next? Let's talk about your book next.
Ah, sure. So one of the things you've been up to in addition to courses
is writing books, Django in action.
Almost released, is that right?
In singular, this is my first, so be kind.
It's in early release, so you're able to purchase the
first, I think we're up to seven chapters
and essentially if you buy the electronic edition, then you
get a chapter, about a chapter or two a month, it kind of comes out piecemeal.
It's on, it's called Django in action
it's on Django, it's divided into three parts
so part one primarily is sort of that intro
stuff, how to get projects going, what a view is, routes and all that kind of good thing
part two is around the tools that are built into Django
so how to use the admin, slightly more
advanced topics and I'm currently in the process of writing part three
and the intent of part three is how to extend your
use to the third party libraries, you just mentioned
Django Ninja, so I'm hoping to have a chapter both on Ninja and a chapter on
HTMX and both of these will guide people to, okay great, so now you've
got Django but you want to build X, I need an API, well how do I do that
well there's Ninja and there's the DRF, I want to have a little more
functionality, a little more dynamicism, oh okay, well a good answer
to that now is HTMX, so this is how you wrap those things together
so the intent is to try and cover that, I'm sort of hoping
that there's enough there in part three that folks who have done
a bit of Django before are still interested in it and can pick
some new things up as you go along and
with the release of Django 5 I've been busy going back in
and adding, hey and this is what they added in 5 and this is what changes
so trying to cover all of that, full
publication will probably be early next year but if you're on the electronic
copy you can start now and go
from there, so yeah it's available
and I guess while I'm on the topic I've been getting a lot of great feedback
and we've got a forum for folks who've read the book and it makes a big difference to me
because somebody says, oh hey I did this and it didn't quite work
and I'm like, oh okay it shouldn't but let's add a couple sentences about that so it's
kind of great to have this dynamic process going, improve it
as I go along which is so those folks who have been
participating in the early release, I very much appreciate that feedback
It's cool to be able to build it out in public and not just
drop 300 pages of printed something. Well you know
it's something I'm sure you encounter with the courses all the time right?
I've got, we'll call it a particular sense of humor shall we?
and when I put something in a
course that I find funny, it's not like you're, there's no audience right?
You have no idea whether or not the joke lands
it's sort of the same thing, you never get any of that kind of feedback with
a course and a book can very much be the same way so yeah that early
release in the forum helps a little bit so
nobody's going to tell me whether or not I'm funny but they can at least catch whether or not the code works
which is useful. Exactly.
And speaking of projects you've been working on, one of the things that kind of inspired
me to have you on the show to just dive into Django and HTMX is you actually did a
talk Python course, HTMX and Django, modern Python
web apps hold the JavaScript which is awesome. That's a really fun
just under two hours course that really shows people
how to integrate HTMX into Django. Yeah
and you know we should shout out the, there's a sister course on there that you
started out with Flask and essentially I took the same concepts
and then stuck it in the Django world so if you're coming from
Django instead of Flask then this I guess it's
sort of the equivalent of translating it into Spanish so we cover a lot
of the same kind of concepts in both courses
we start with this video collector project so it's an actual
project with clickable links and it allows you to sort of store
videos that you see from YouTube and shows a little
image of the thumbnail and you know who the author is
so a little database kind of application. Start, we start
there with a working project and then we HTMX-ify it. I'm just going to make
words up. Yeah, it's a verb we can do it. Why not? We're making verbs today
come on. It works. So in both courses we add like
a click to edit so you've got a little link you click on the link and it turns into a form
infinite scroll the idea is you scroll down the content keeps
getting added searches you type which to me is just such a
beautiful example right like if you've already got search on the website
HTMX it's like four lines of code like it's startlingly
easy to do it in a dynamic fashion and it's
complete with things like it updates the URL so you can do deep linking
and you can do you know back button goes to the previous search
and all that basically comes by adding just a few attributes so that's
beautiful and then the Django version of the course also has a
fourth example which is how to take HTMX and integrate
it in with bootstraps you've got libraries on top of libraries
and how sort of that JavaScript event system works in that situation
and how you can get those things going so yeah so it's very
example driven let's add features and
learn how HTMX works along the way you know what
surprised me about getting into HTMX was
you add all this functionality to this existing app kind of like
you do in this course or I did in the flask course and the code
actually gets cleaner and simpler at the end like this is how can
it do more and be more easy to understand and clean them yeah
than the previous version you know yeah yeah well and you know what we're going to
spend a bunch of time talking about today too is there's some libraries out there that make it even better and
some of these I found after writing the course so it's sort of
like oh well hey if I do that and go back use that and I would write even less
code which is fantastic yeah alright let's
you know not everyone is in love has already had this love
affair that you and I have had with HTMX so
maybe you could just give us like a really quick
overview of what HTMX is and I think maybe the way to do
it would be just we could make a concrete example like click to edit
or something like that we could just show like you know how
maybe you could just talk us through an example real quick and that could suffice
is what the idea is yeah so it's HTMX is a
JavaScript library and it's a JavaScript library that if you're lucky
means you'll never have to write JavaScript so you essentially drop it into
your page and how it works is you apply
a set of attributes to your HTML and those
attributes affect how things work
so all the attributes are namespaced they all start with HX
and the key ones are HX get and HX post which
you can see on the example there on the button there's an HX get
and essentially what happens is for a button or a link
you're replacing something like an HREF with this concept
and when you click the button or the link
that get fires an AJAX call to the server
and the intent is instead of getting a full
new page like you normally would when you click a link it will send
back a little piece and that little piece is then injected
into the page and you can use different attributes to control how
the example that's up on the screen here is using the
HX swap attribute and that essentially says
replace the entire outer div with the content that comes back from the server
so the div with the first name last
name email which is just a read only gets replaced
with the form that comes down from the server so now essentially we've got click to
edit on something that was display and now is a form
so that's the general idea. HTMX sets
some headers so that when the server side you can
tell whether or not it's actually a HTMX call or not
and in the Django world this works really really well so a common pattern
with a Django view when you're dealing with forms is say have
a get and a post inside of the same view so you do a get to
get the page and then the post when you're actually submitting the form
for that page and you keep it all together inside of the same view function.
HTMX can do something very similar and essentially instead of checking for get
or post you check for this HTMX header and then you can either send down
the whole page or the little partial replacement like in this example is the form
that goes with it. So in addition to things
like this form you can attach it to say
we kind of talked about search as you type
so you can attach these kinds of attributes to say an input tag
and then when, yeah maybe you want to bring one of those up we've got it somewhere
yeah perfect and there's additional
things that you can set that change how it behaves so for example
you want to activate this event when someone has typed something
in so you're looking at the JavaScript key up event you only want to
do it if the input has changed not just if the event
has expired so if I'm using my arrow keys it doesn't send something off to the server
and then you can put a delay in so that if we get a bunch of
events at the same time it's not until there's a pause where you send it to the server
so if somebody's rapidly typing you don't send every single keystroke up
in the course I also cover you can set up
conditionals on it as well so I've got to check in
one version of one sample that checks whether or not there's actually content
so you have to have typed at least three letters for example right so you can put these kinds
of checks in and essentially it really is very much like
round trip 1.0 web except
what you're getting down is instead of a whole new page is you're getting a
partial and the htmx library injects this in
so you know it's a way of doing some
very 2.0 stuff in a very 1.0 way
which means you have very little javascript to have to write
so I personally have always found react to be
overkill and that's not I'm not trying to slag react people programming languages
are a religious topic right this isn't me saying you shouldn't this is me
saying it doesn't work for me and I started
coding for the web back in the pearls CGI days and
when javascript was first introduced one of the arguments for it was oh you don't
need a tool chain right it just worked and you just refresh the page
and it goes so the whole concept of like typescript and a transpiler
and web packaging and all the other stuff that's attached to modern
web dev I find exhausting and because of that I've
kind of always headed towards view because it's a little lighter weight
but even then I'm often doing things against recommendation I
have been known to serve few javascript files through the
jango template engine so that I can embed json objects and
that's a no no but it's worked for me but I often
find with view even though it's lighter weight because it's written
for folks who primarily use node there's some assumptions in the documentation
there's always there's always this bit of a challenge to sort of get it to work in jango
and what I've you know I've gone back and looked at everywhere I've
coded with view htmx solves like
95 to 99% of the things that
I would have done with view that I've done with view in the past and the only
exception was I once wrote a drag and drop card game
and I don't know if I could do that in htmx but pretty much
everything else I could replace with htmx and the amount
of code I'd have to write would be a lot less the amount of javascript I'd have to write
which I always sort of felt is a necessary evil it would
almost just go away and now it would be unnecessary and
still evil but yeah that's me on my soapbox
so yeah so that's the short version of it you've played with it a bit
did I miss anything something you should highlight no I think that was a really great summary
the one thing I would like to throw out there that is not immediately apparent to people but
is a tremendous advantage of htmx
is that typical web development puts
you into different mindsets for different parts of the application
and context so I'm working on the database so I've got to think about database
access and security in that context now I'm working on server side code
and what can I do on the server what kind of code can I run on the server what packages
do I have available now I'm on the client side I can't do direct stuff I have to have
an API to interact with the server so how do I build the API and there's all the
restrictions of the code regardless whether it's javascript or something else in the front
end and so you have these context switches of like where are you
in the app and with htmx it's like everything's on the server everything's in one
language everything's in python and django and whatever you do
you do it in python and django in this context or whatever your web framework is
and you know the title of the course hold the javascript
when I did the original flask course I got a bunch of
flack from somebody on the thing that artists formerly known as twitter
like why are you hating on javascript this is just not what the world needs
I'm like I'm not hating on javascript I'm hating on the idea of having to write in
three or four languages to accomplish one thing and evidence of this
like evidence of this benefit is it's popular in the node community
yes right yeah it's popular in the javascript community and
they don't hate javascript but they like us would also
like to not have two different styles of javascript two different modes of javascript
two different context of code execution in just one place
and I think it's easy to see like how does this do something similar
but cleaner than react it also transforms
like where and how your code runs and I think that's really a big deal
yeah well at risk of getting too far off topic
right like the web is a giant house of cards and it always has been
and our answer every single time has been
oh let's add another layer of cards and we've been adding layers of cards
for you know 20 years and it's shaky in places
right so anything that takes a couple layers off the top and simplifies how you think about things
I think is definitely a benefit and like you said
you know htmx is tool agnostic
right so it's got nothing to do with python
it works with whatever your stack is and that in itself is something that is
a thing of beauty because you know if you're
an old person knock yourself out right you want to
php whatever go for it it doesn't matter because
essentially it's back to the fundamental idea that html is based on
which is that hypertext concept of I click on something it goes and gets a new thing
and it puts it in the page and in this case instead of it being the whole page
it's a partial it's a powerful powerful tool
indeed it sure is so
just to kind of put a
finalize this whole thought here is like so Mark's out there in the audience asking so most
business cases use cases can be solved with htmx my vote
is yeah especially if you put business use case if you're writing
forms over data like sort of enterprise apps like
99% right all the crud stuff like I said like
I think the only thing I would the only place it would it doesn't really
fit is when you're getting like to the level of something like games
and in fact so we'll talk about it briefly but there's a there's a in a minute
but there's a white paper on htmx.org that talks about one of the companies
that actually did a conversion and you know they had a fully
running site and converted it over to htmx
and they had some big wins by doing that
well come back to it in a minute but yeah I'd be
I'm hard pressed to think of a business use case that wouldn't
be improved by using htmx instead
and it's so simple that like a lot of times the use case was
well just the web app it's not dynamic it doesn't do that you can add a lot of
cool dynamic features to an existing app rather than like oh we have this
really complex react app that we're going to simplify I imagine you could
it's kind of like a lift up the feature set then yeah well it's well there
and in fairness you know some of this comes out of things like html5 as well
right so having a email type on your input field means that there's a certain
amount of validation that's happening in the browser now right so things that we used to
have to do in JavaScript now the browser is taking care of some of that so by
taking some of those kinds of features you know I don't have to have that check
but manually written to get to the end
of the browser so I don't have to have that manually written
on the browser side anymore and then adding htmx to give that
dynamicism you know it just sort of tops it up right so it's
like I said it's a step forward the one other area where
htmx seems like it's just not going to work is if you want to build
offline progressive web apps because offline is
like the antithesis of htmx
here so what I thought we could do for
our conversation here would be to focus on
just a bunch of tools that people can bring to
bear on making working mostly with Django
but also some of the other web frameworks like other Python web frameworks
and htmx together make that more seamless and we
worked together to put together quite a list here didn't we so there's two
awesome lists we'll talk about yeah so the 95%
of what we're talking about we found sourced off of these two
curated lists the first one's called awesome htmx
and the second one is called awesome Python htmx
the first one is a collection of all
languages so it's got a section on Python but
you know as we were saying if you're right there htmx from rails
so if you're coming from somewhere else and you want to use htmx there's a whole
lot of pieces in here and
it ranges from things like tools and articles and that kind
of stuff the second one is a Python specific one
which is awesome Python htmx they call themselves
pi hat a little bit overlap between the tool
sets but again this is just sort of some mastered lists for
the places you can go and get content and examples
and all that kind of good stuff and in fact
one of the first white papers that I wanted to talk about a little bit
is on the awesome Python htmx list
as I mentioned this there's a link to it on
this list and as I mentioned this is actually a case study
off of htmx.org it was presented at a
Django con in 2022 so if you don't feel like reading you can
go off and see the video but it's about a conversion
and it took them about two months to completely convert
from a react based site to htmx
they had zero reduction in functionality
67% reduction in the size of the code base so that's
significant right like that's two thirds of your code you no longer have to maintain
because it's gone increase the Python code by
140% so that's sort of the trade off we're moving some of that
JavaScript stuff onto the server side they reduced their total
JavaScript dependencies by 96% which essentially means
it's almost gone as a result of that they had
shorter web build times shorter page loads less
memory and because of the less memory they were also able to handle
larger data sets so they were able to put more content on the page
at a time using htmx than react because
the amount of overhead react put on the page meant it was eating up
space and it just couldn't handle it now you know it's
one white paper and of course it's on the htmx.org site so of course it's going to
be biased towards you should use htmx but it does show that this
is being used in the real world and with a lot of success
and so it's definitely something that you kind of want to look at
I can't remember if I sent you the link but there's another one recently that
showed up on bytecode this is a
site that I've frequently linked to in the
Pycoder newsletter a lot of really good content with the bytecode
guy there it's he's done
something called nope that's not it
it's the three in real life use cases for
Python and htmx it's byte without an i that's why
it's the other kind of byte he's a little cranky
there it is perfect so this is more of
an anecdote than case study but essentially he's gone
through three kinds of projects that he's recently done
with Python that are web based and went
oh let's use htmx instead and it's made his life easier and so essentially
he's just saying hey here are some cases where I've actually done this and it's been useful
and you know to the question we got earlier
really it is that sort of hey I've got a form and I want the form to be slightly more dynamic
so hey it would be an awful lot easier if I just stick this in and go
and if I remember correctly he's using FastAPI with this as well right so it's
not just Django or flask there's lots of choices out there
yeah it works really well yeah he's using FastAPI
FastAPI works equally well with it and some of the tools we'll talk about
are relevant as well so
very cool also maybe some other things on the list I'm just seeing
on the screen right now is like there's an IntelliJ aka PyCharm
plugin for htmx so it gives you autocomplete for all your htmx stuff
and probably for VS Code as well so if you're gonna
use one of those editors and do htmx be sure to install that so you get autocomplete
and validation for the different things
cool alright well let's talk about maybe the big first one
Django-htmx for all the extensions for using Django
with htmx so this is the go to
not only is this the right way to do things but this is also
in fact I talk about this in the Django version of the course
but there's also about a half dozen libraries out there
that all said oh we're just gonna do what he did but we're gonna do it for
our library so this has been an inspiration to other folks as well
it's by a gentleman named Adam Johnson and it's essentially some
Django middleware and some utility classes so in Django
each view gets a request object this library adds a member
to that request object called htmx you can use
that member as a boolean and if it evaluates to
true then it was there's an htmx header so it was an htmx call
and if it's false it wasn't so this is what I was referring to
earlier about that idea of being able to have one view manage multiple
things because essentially you just check this boolean and either I'm feeding
out the full page or I'm feeding out the partial
because the big concept in htmx is there'll be a request
for the page which shows you the whole thing but an interaction won't want all the page content
they just want the fragment that the new version of the fragment like the
new table row that has been edited or something like that so on the
server you gotta decide what version do I give them
and this answers that question. Exactly and this is so you know to
take it back to the click to edit example that we talked about at the top
the first call to the page no htmx it shows the content
of the page including the person's name and email address or whatever it is and then
when somebody clicks the link and that needs to be replaced by the form you can use the same
view and that view then just returns the form as a partial rather than
the whole thing and so checking this boolean allows you to tell which mode am I
in and how do I want to do that. It also
can there's other information on as well so you can
check things like the target and the triggers so these are other attributes
that you can use to help you with the search. I didn't mention the triggers when I
sort of explained things at the top but the trigger
is that event management piece that I was talking about with like searches
you type so the trigger says a key press or there's
another one that allows you to do on scroll down right so when the tag
is revealed then trigger the call so
the Django htmx will give you information about what the
target is and then you can use that to help you make decisions
or if you've got multiple htmx things happening inside the same page
you can suss it out that way. Quite
frankly the boolean mechanism is enough for me to want to install
this library. The rest of it I don't use very often but just
being able to check which mode I'm in and not have to
check that header myself is worth installing
and it feels very Django-esque because
it essentially just replaces that get post pattern that I was talking about earlier
but instead with htmx. There's also some
other utilities in here so the way
the way that htmx works
if a url is hit that's a 404 it just eats it
there's a chunk of debug javascript that comes with this library
that you can put in so that you actually get the Django 404 page so it essentially
overrides the response back from the view
and spits out an actual debug page that you're used to so it allows
you to debug your htmx a little better and then there's some
classes and functions for things like polling and controlling redirects
and a few other things that are also
useful for typing as well so if you're doing a type check
that you want to replace that this call comes back with htmx
then you can put it inside of your typing that this is this kind of class that comes back
so very very handy library
very strongly recommended that if you're doing Django and htmx this is the place
to go. Okay this is the big one alright
next up this is from the multilingual awesome list
Django JS lib htmx
so this one's pretty lightweight it pretty much allows you to
use tags to drop the library in so it essentially just means
you're scriptifying some of the things that you're using in the library
I haven't used it myself I think a lot of it
depends on how deep your pages have to go personally
I would just stick this in and hard code it myself but it's there if you
want it. Yep sounds good
next up htmx flask this one I think is really interesting
and you might be saying like well why do I Django we're talking about what I care about flask
but we already went through two of the examples on the htmx.org
site and what you see is the client side but there's no visibility
to what the server side looks like in that example code but this
this will help maybe
this is all the
excuse me there are three things called htmx flask flask htmx
and flask htmx with a capital so
they all start to blur together
so yes this one is essentially if you
at the top if you're not listening if you were watching
Michael showed the htmx site
and a couple of the examples this is a flask
as they've redone all of those examples from the server in flask
so if you're looking for how to implement these things rather than just
in pure html and you want to see them in the flask server you can go that
here and because it ties back to the actual
htmx.org page it allows you to sort of see how all the pieces
fit and and look your code up as you go yeah
I think the examples are really awesome and simple on htmx.org but they don't
they don't tell the whole story if you're trying to actually implement it
and if you're like I just don't really know how to do that with my web framework here's at least
a python set of examples that'll get you pretty close yeah and there's a
few of these as well near the tail end here we'll talk about a couple
others that there's one which is actually a board game which is a nice top to
bottom full example but this one essentially relates the example
content off the htmx site to your flask server nice
all right server sent events
so this is if you're using
starlight the
this is a tech demo essentially by Jan Vlasinski
and essentially he's using fast api
htmx and starlight and the page is
the example is actually quite simple there's almost no content on it it's just a little
bit of almost it almost looks like a debug so there's a few
variables which are randomly generated inside of an asynchronous call on the
server you run it using uvicorn and essentially when you visit
the page the values update on the fly so the
sleep in the server code is pretty short it's about a third of a second
so the debug messages go flying by rather quickly
but it gives you an idea essentially how to wire these kinds of
things together I've never used starlet myself have you played with it at all
only by way of using fast api and
light star
so they're both built on top of it but not directly
but you know server sent events are interesting because
like we've had traditional web interaction
which we kind of talked about already and then you've got web sockets for super
dynamic bidirectional communication but a lot of times people
use web sockets because they just want to receive stuff that happens on
the server on the client like a dashboard right the dashboard doesn't need to update
the server and broadcast it just wants all its pieces update live
and so server sent events are like a lightweight web socket type thing and it's
really cool to be able to plug that in with htmx I think
and I haven't played with it myself but htmx also has a polling mechanism
so if you're not using technology on the server side that can enable this
you can get around it the other way obviously an event from the server is
far less noisy than polling but by
using it basically gives you a couple different options so if you happen to be using
something that isn't asynchronous you don't want to go all the way down that path
you could also look at the polling techniques inside of htmx to get you
to solve similar kinds of problems yeah if you're not building a
massive massively busy website maybe it's
totally fine to just pull it right yeah well some of it also has to do with the frequency
right like if it's data that only needs to update you know once every 30 seconds or so
then well if somebody's on a page that might be the right way to go yep
alright now over to
this we'll start pulling some items off the pie hat sure
yeah so another example on here yeah another list here
we sort of started talking a little bit about this I've been hopping around a bit
the so that white paper that I talked about is on here
and a bunch of some of the other tools that we've got as well
good overall list has some
sort of a nice breakdown that it's got sort of the resources as in like here are some articles
you can read you know they've got a link to your flask
course so I think we need to do a PR here and we definitely got to do
a PR and but I appreciate one in there we do
I appreciate however this got here thank you people so but yeah we got
to do a PR so so yeah so some good links in here to some
obviously to some quality content that they've
that's right that's right yeah so there's
a bunch of different ones and I think probably the helper libraries is the section
that has like really what people are imagining when they're
thinking awesome list at least awesome list for programming so
yeah in fact so there's three on here that I think I'm going to want to sort of cover
back to back because they're all essentially the same idea
so I mentioned that Django HTMX is a
like a sort of the go to way of doing the Django stuff
and it inspired a bunch of other people well there's ASGI HTMX
Starlet HTMX and HTMX flask and all three
of these sorry I'm flapping around as we go along there we go you're trying to
keep up so all three of these are essentially like the Django HTMX
library but for those appropriate other libraries
so they essentially add that meta information
to the requests or in the case of ASGI to the
scope and it's the same kind of thing it gives you an idea what the headers there and what the other
information is so if you're if you're not on Django if you're
on flask then HTMX flask or ASGI HTMX
will work and essentially solve the same kind of problems that Django HTMX
does and all three of those are listed on that on that pie hat
piece so that's ASGI HTMX is by
Floremont Monca Starlet HTMX is by Felix Ingram
and HTMX flask is by Sergei Pons
Frank says not sure how to say his last name there yeah so a lot of
good work going on in this space
all right how about Django HTMX patterns ah yes
good old spooky looky so he's got an awesome
GitHub handle here this is Luke Plant who
is or was I'm not sure the time frame on that but
was heavily involved with Django he was a core developer for a while and essentially
he's written up a article here on good ways
of interacting with Django and HTMX there's some code examples
to go with it we're going to talk in a minute about
the block render block library
he's a fan of that approach essentially this is got good reasons
for how you group your snippets together that idea of having
your code in all your code in the same view as well as keeping your snippets possibly
even the same file he talks about these kinds of things as well
as sort of hands you off to some of the toolkits that we're talking about as well to help
you do this so he's I'm
a fan he's also got a great article called Django views the right way
which is he tends to write fairly opinionated pieces
and of course when you agree with his opinion that's fantastic must be brilliant
so he's very
finally someone standing up for our way of thinking exactly so he's very pro function based
views and for folks who aren't Django people that's a Coke versus Pepsi thing
versus class based views so but because I tend to my
bias heads in that direction he must be right so everything else he's written is brilliant
as well so but a lot of good information in here to dig around
some best practices as well as I said to some
references to the kinds of libraries we're talking about to make your life easier
yeah I think these kinds of things like these pattern ideas
really help you think about how am I going to add that into my
application right instead of just here's some libraries and here's
a htmx and here's a you know like how does it look right you know how do you make
your Django code better and cleaner by putting this stuff together
yeah well and honestly like you know my
tongue planted in my firmly in my cheek with you know the whole function versus class thing
notwithstanding one of the things I love about these kinds of opinion pieces is
it allows you to help sort of formulate oh does that fit in my
version or does it not fit in my version and how does this map to what I'm doing
it allows you to sort of think more deeply about the patterns that you're using as you're coding
and it might you might leave an article like that and go oh
I now I understand more about why I chose what I did and I'm going to stick with it
it might be the opposite of what that article is there but it opens you up to other ways of
thinking about these things right it's it comes from that
practice of doing it rather than like you said just a couple quick examples
another thing about patterns that I've always loved
design patterns programming style is
when you think about a problem if you just think about like kind of the idea of the pattern
like what are the steps it's hard to think about it
really down in the details but if you can think about as
the whole thing that the pattern applies to and what of its benefits
and trade-offs you can think at a much higher level and sort of it lets
you not think in detail right like you could say well
I want to have you know outside the web you can say I want to have a way where we just have one variable
just copy of it it's just one and everybody shares it instead of passing it around
like okay or you could say we have a singleton like boom like
that one statement just what are the
what are the benefits what are the drawbacks what are the use cases like it makes testing hard
it makes reuse really easy because you just grab it like
and it's sort of like that for htmx right as you think
like oh this pattern applies right here let's go or it doesn't because
of and it becomes some of it's a vocabulary thing as well right so
the there's this concept we're going to spend a little bit of time
talking about in a minute that is the partials which is those little snippets
that I was talking about and in fact if I remember correctly
part the term partials has been stolen it's something rails uses right
but by using that same by using that same vocabulary
it allows you to sort of talk about these things like you said at that higher level concept
right so that the patterns help with the vocabulary help with you communicate about those concepts
rather than spending the first 10 minutes of your conversation trying to establish whether or not you're talking
about the same thing yes exactly exactly
speaking of we have fragments and we have partials and this is a little
bit of an alternate like this is a coke
versus pepsi as well yeah and I think you know
considering you're the maintainer of the sister library
to this maybe this one should be you maybe you want to talk a little bit about
yeah yeah yeah sure so
well so my understanding here with the
with the ginger partials one is you
can express parts of your page to contain
the template data that you want so for example here's a whole thing you know
with a HTML and a head and a body and then it has one thing says this is a block
and it says just a paragraph this is a magic number with that value right
so with this thing
what you can do is you can say just grab that thing we called
content and provide the data over to it because I don't want to
show the whole page I want to show just this section of it the benefit
of this and there's an essay over on htmx.org
something about the locality of behavior and
things like that I believe is what it something titled like that and the idea
is I have my entire HTML listed all
in one as if it was a static page and I can use the server side
to grab pieces out of the HTML and make them dynamic
sections right like I described like grab this block
render it using the template engine the ginger
two fragments okay so that's the I don't know Coke
should we Coke or Pepsi which one does it get but let's call this one
the Coke style and that I think is really useful right because
what is your alternative
have that HTML in two places that's not a great option
right you don't want to have it's just like you wouldn't duplicate code you don't want to duplicate the design
and the HTML and stuff that makes up the part of the page and have
in line for the main one and then a second copy just so you can make it
dynamic so I'm not against this I think this is really a neat idea
here to be able to grab that section and render that
Pepsi side
Michael's library called ginger partials which says
instead of putting all into one big place let's treat it more like
function based programming right so
what you can do is you can say I'm going to define
an HTML partial or piece that just has
that section that you're interested in right so
maybe you might have like one part that displays
a particular video in our example from the course right and that thing has
to be past certain bits of information
like what the video is so you can get the ID and so on
and then when you use it you kind of instead of putting the HTML in line you call it
like a function in the HTML so you would say
like div here's the thing that contains it you know render partial here's the
thing and you call it so it's kind of two sides of the same coin but
very much Coke Pepsi is a good analogy here like this one says
I would like to maybe be able to reuse that across different pages
just like you would a function in Python I might want to use it more than
one place and so it makes sense to have it in its own separate
thing right like in this example you might want to show a video but you might want to
do it on like a list of videos and you might want to do it on a profile
page where you have favorites right and those wouldn't the
fragment style you would have to duplicate that HTML so
this one allows you to have like a
nice simple way to do that right and then on the server side it makes
it simpler because I don't know if there's any examples here
I'm sure there is but on the server side all you do is you just say
the template response is the partial and you just provide
the data and you don't have to do like if it's the full thing or if it's partial thing
I'm going to do different stuff on the server right so
that's the Jinja partials I don't have a
Django partials but you know this applies for Flask, FastAPI
and others. So on the Django template library the
include tag is
either slightly more powerful than the Jinja one
or just better documented because a lot of the things you
a lot of the reasons you wrote this library I can do with the existing
Django include tag so there's like a tiny little use case where it doesn't overlap
but like everything in the course for example I was able to do quite simply with
just using the include tag. There is a
library out there that is the what did you say it was
the Coke version and that is the Django render block
this is by Patrick Cloak and essentially he's
using something very similar to the Jinja 2 fragments and
it essentially allows you to pull out a template block
from a page. This is actually SpookyLuki's
preferred approach it's in his patterns. I think
in this case I'm a Pepsi guy I'm with you I would rather have the piece inside
its own file but I think the reason
behind having it in the blocks is essentially you can turn conditionals
on have that one page the whole thing gets rendered and then the snippets are
always using the same library and you can just flag hey I want this partial
piece coming out of it. So yeah essentially
these are very very similar concepts just the Django versus the
Django templating because of course Django is in Django
as well so the Django native templating versus the Django piece
and you can take either approach depending on what works for you.
Yep and just to wrap this up before I get a lot of email. A lot of
email. There's a whole section that says why not just use include or
macro from Jinja and there's a great long discussion here with lots
of examples. The short version is with
macro if you want to render the template alone you
have to have a third page that just calls the macro
that just embeds the macro and then calls it
in an empty page for the template. Why not use include
well with include
you have to have the
variable names in the partial match the consumer so it's
as if you had to say I want to function I want to call a function but
your local variable names have to match exactly the parameter
names in every use case. You can't say like user
where there was a user name. Nope you can't call this function. You're supposed to call your local variable
user. You know it's so there's a there's a look
at that discussion and then then email me if you have to. And that's that's why
the Django one doesn't have this problem is because the include tag in Django
has a with keyword which allows you to essentially
say I want this this bit of context passed in as that value
so you can essentially the equivalent there would be with video equals V
email equals user dot email to accomplish the same thing which is why
I could get away with not needing the extra library. Nice
there is somebody down here who said
I'm not sure what their name is
but I think they found an internal like a deeply internal
function from within
ginger I think I'm not sure if it's in
ginger or flask but you're able effectively to do the same thing but it's like
I don't know I'm not a fan I like grabbing some random internal thing going
I think we'll probably just use that you know. Also just
there's a chameleon's partial if you're a chameleon template person that does the same thing
it's a ginger partial as well. Yeah when you first showed this to me I looked
it up in the ginger docs because I don't use ginger as often and it kind of
hints that this is there but it was really really unclear
it just sort of gave one example and didn't explain it and so
it doesn't surprise me that there's something that can be done but
maybe it's publicly available and if they got documented
a little better it might solve the problem and you could you know close up that chunk of
code you had to maintain. Yeah I mean I'm not necessarily in love
with it I just I created it because I want to have really nice clean code right yeah exactly
of the problem you know pull up the Django render block you already really talked about
that one that's on the similar side as to the
fragments. Fragments sorry. Fragments what we talked about that's right
where all the stuff is together and I think that's a good idea if you're never
ever going to use that block of that bit of HTML
and dynamic bit anywhere else but as soon as you are then it's like well
it's starting to get I don't know that's my philosophy. Yeah I've always
you know one of the reasons I use the include template even for
I use it even just to shrink the size of the HTML file like I don't even care
if it's not reused sometimes I just find it easier to read because HTML is so
verbose I sometimes just find it easier to read something that goes oh include
a row from this row file I'm like oh okay I don't have to think about how
many divs are in the row I understand what's in that row and it allows me to read it easier so
obviously the cost of that is performance of compiling the template but
I'll take that for code readability every day of the week just throw more CPU at it
Yeah I'm 100% with you and
you don't have to worry about whether the 17th div
is matching or not or yeah all that stuff. Yeah.
Okay you talked about Flask HTML the ASGI one
HX requests. What's this one about?
This is similar right? Yeah so this
no this is a it solves the same problem but in a different fashion
Okay. So this is by a gentleman named Jakob Lundstein
and essentially he's using a lot of the class based
view philosophy not that he's actually using class based
views but essentially you are building out your
requests HX request handling as classes
and he's gone to the level of you
defining custom tags that you use instead of the attribute
and it will automatically wire that together so you don't even have to declare
your URLs and this is and again you know back to that
Coke versus Pepsi thing this is sort of that the definition between
function based and class based the contrast between function and class based
classes always made me a little uncomfortable because they're a little bit magic
and it often means writing less code but if for
someone who isn't used to it they have to go digging to understand what's happening
he's definitely taken a bit of a magic approach here there's less
code but you can but you've got this
magical wiring of change email as you've got up on the screen
getting wired to the actual HX change email underneath and being able
to find all that code so if you're a class based view person
this will probably feel very very natural and a good approach to take
if you're not already intimately familiar with class based views
this wouldn't be somewhere where I would send you
but yeah. - You're going to add more overhead to figure out how to put all that
together. - Exactly. - To use the other libraries. - That's right.
- Alright well we have a lot of things we've been going through
but I think we're getting close to the end of the list here Django dashboards
- Yeah actually why don't we just skip down to
Auella Club and maybe we can cap it out right there because I think that's probably a really
good example. - On this page? - No no a different library
just the last one there it's Auella dash club
- Hold on I've got to get back
Where am I? Oh on our notes
right? - Yes sorry. - Yeah somebody different places
- Speaking of things you can fix and edit. - Yeah.
- This is a live stream ladies and gentlemen. - Exactly.
I don't see this where is this?
- I thought it was in Pyhat.
- Okay Pyhat.
Could be in the other one. - There we go it's in chat.
- Oh it was in the original one. - Oh it was in the original one.
- The multi-lingual version. - I had it in the wrong list my apologies.
- That's fine. - So this is if you want to go one
place to see everything working together this is the place to go.
So this is also by Adam Johnson so he's the same guy who does
Django HTMX. Auella is a Nambian game
that is kind of similar to another game called Hus.
I will admit I couldn't fully wrap my head around the rules of the game.
It's essentially like a little board with holes in it
and there's stones in the board. There's a good picture up there.
The rules are on your turn you have to move some of your stones
and if you move them correctly your turn is done. If you don't move them correctly
you can take other people's stones whatever. So it's one of those
very simple games with a lot of strategy. And like I said I didn't quite fully
wrap my head around the game but that's not what I was here for.
He's written a HTMX based version
on the web here. You've got a fully
automated computer opponent so you can play against the computer. It has
the layout of the board with the number of rows and stones and then
there's a number for how many stones are in each hole and if you click
one of the links, one of the numbers, it automatically moves the
stones according to the rules. And all of this of course
as you can imagine is updated through HTMX.
He even has the base version of this ships with
the Django debug toolbar on so you can watch
what is going on. And then in the background because it will host
multiple games at a time, we were talking a bit about that polling concept.
It's using the HTMX's polling mechanism
and in the top right hand corner there's a little report of how many games are in progress
at the moment. So this is, I really really like this
example. So there's other examples that are good on the list but most of them are toys.
They either show off something like an event coming from the server and you know no
cleanliness. One of the other examples I played with was like a little book database
and you know it worked but if you typed in a
number in a place that was, a name in a place where it was supposed to have a number it would crash.
This is actually a working application and so you've got
a nice solid example to how everything works, all the different attributes
and go. So if you're comfortable enough with, if you're new to Django
then maybe this isn't where you start. But if you're comfortable with Django and you really
just want to see one place where all the HX parts are working together
and it's a fun way to learn something, this would be the, this would definitely
be the example I would use.
Excellent, yeah it looks like quite a cool
way to build things with HTMX. I'm not even sure I would have
thought HTMX totally applies at this level of kind of interactivity
because it says you can do player versus player games with
the polling trigger and stuff like that. Yep, yeah it's
a pretty deep example but of course you kind of expect it out of the HTMX
Django HTMX guy, right? So, and actually so as an
aside there's also a relatively decent demo inside
of that library as well. So if you grab, if you get clone
Django HTMX there's an examples directory that also has
not quite as comprehensive this but that's another good place to start as well if you're looking for
sample code. So plenty of good stuff out there with
good real world purpose.
Yeah, absolutely. Cool, well quite the
look inside of HTMX Christopher, thank you. Yeah, it's
been fun. Yeah, so many things these days to make it work
with Django. When I started out like many of these libraries didn't exist.
I would have probably just grabbed one and used it.
Had it at the time, you know. It definitely makes a big
difference and the HTMX community is, I accidentally
found out very, very vibrant. Somebody found the future
table of contents of my book and posted on
as you said the artist formerly known as Twitter. Hey, there's an HTMX chapter
coming in this Django book and my feed just exploded for like the next
three days of everybody going, yay HTMX. So there's a
very strong and excited community out there that's playing with this tool
and as I said it makes a real big difference in your ability to build stuff
quickly and effectively. Sure does and speaking to the long term
sustainability right at the top of the HTMX.org page it says we're excited
to announce that HTMX has been accepted into the first
class of the GitHub open source accelerator. So more momentum
for HTMX. Excellent. Alright, final call
to action. People want to get started with this stuff. They want to dive into it a little bit more. What do you tell them?
Start with the page you've got up right now
for sure. HTMX.org is a good place to go
and you know at risk of sounding like an infomercial we have a couple of really
high quality courses that you could also check out.
Definitely be places to go to go with things and
of course we'll link in the show notes to all those lists but there's a lot
of content there if you just kind of want to go digging and play around. Yeah we only
just touched on a little tiny bit of it so plenty more to go into
lots of interviews, lots of example, lots of blog posts
and articles that you can go check out and your book. Your book will
be out in spring so people can check that out as well. Appreciate it. Yes.
Thank you so much for being on the show. Always nice to catch up with you.
Glad to be here. Yeah. See ya. Bye.
you